---
Author: Kyle Jones Publication_date: March 1, 2024 Canonical_link: "https://medium.com/@kyle-t-jones/the-craft-of-it-architecture-core-competencies-of-successful-it-architects-93cb4a7a571e" Export_from_medium_date: November 10, 2025
---
# The Craft of IT Architecture: Core Competencies of Successful IT Architects IT Architecture is a complex craft

that requires a diverse set of capabilities. In my experience, the best architects who have develop the...
### The Craft of IT Architecture: Core Competencies of Successful IT Architects IT Architecture is a complex craft

that requires a diverse set of capabilities. In my experience, the best architects who have develop the competencies of abstraction, translation, vision, and clarification. Abstraction involves breaking down complex problems into understandable components. Architects identify patterns and points of similarity that allow the application of existing frameworks and solutions. This "divide and conquer" approach through thoughtful abstraction enables more manageable problem-solving. Translation refers to the architect's role as a bridge between business stakeholders and technical teams. We speak both languages --- articulating business goals and technical requirements. We translate vague requests into actionable specifics and communicate constraints clearly across groups. Vision means defining "what good looks like" --- the ideal future state we're working toward. With cloud and other technologies providing many options, architects set the vision to guide teams. We aim to create robust, resilient, cost-effective systems by breaking apart monoliths and leveraging events, microservices, and other [architectural patterns](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/architectural-diagrams-a-powerful-tool-for-effective-communication-15601bb631da). Clarification involves identifying what matters most in light of unavoidable tradeoffs. With finite time and resources, we drive consensus on project scope and objectives. We design extensible systems that set the stage for future enhancements, starting simple if needed to deliver initial value. By using these four competencies, architects provide immense business value and bridge the business and technical, drive strategize roadmaps, and unite stakeholders to build the best solutions.
### Related Stories
- [[Enterprise Architectural Tenets (unless you know better ones...)](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/enterprise-architectural-tenets-unless-you-know-better-ones-29fb2b91c8fd)]
- [[Business problem framing for IT Architects](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/business-problem-framing-for-it-architects-a152a393bb6d)]
- [[IT Architecture is a team sport](https://medium.com/@kylejones_47003/it-architecture-is-a-team-sport-37883f24f836)]
